# Welcome to the Global Fishing Watch’s public website for our data and open source code.

We use AIS and machine learning as a tool to shine a light on the
practices of the fishing industry around the word, giving everyone an
eyewitness perspective.

We investigate using data collected by satellites to map, measure, and
publicly illustrate the visible impacts to the oceans and coastal
communities. We partner with other environmental organizations to
strengthen their campaigns to grow awareness of these issues. This
approach disrupts the status quo by showing fishermen and regulators
that abuse of the environment will no longer remain hidden; and that
the the public, investors, and other stakeholders will be able to hold
someone accountable for the damage done by overfishing.

We lead by example, conducting projects that showcase how free public
data and social media tools can be used to analyze, illuminate and
report on issues and incidents, from local to international in scope.
We provide consultation, conduct workshops and give presentations, and
explain how and why we do what we do. We give away our knowledge —
data sources, analytical techniques, software code, maps and images —
encouraging others to extend and build on what we’ve created, and to
use our work to bring about positive change. We invite the public to
participate in collaborative citizen-science projects, helping us
analyze imagery, create unique maps and illustrations, and extract
scientifically useful data to inform research on significant
environmental issues.

The Global Fishing Watch project involves an intensive search for
hard-to-find data: Vessel identities, behavioral models for different
gear types, etc. Once we’ve done the work of finding, filtering and
fixing these datasets to make them useful and mappable, we release
them for everyone to use. Some of the work we do actually creates new
data that didn’t previously exist, allowing scientists around the
world to conduct research that wasn’t previously possible — research
that can have a direct impact on public policy and resource
management. By giving the data away, our impact is multiplied many
times over by the scientists, journalists, citizens groups, government
agencies and other organizations that put it to use.

<object data="{{ site.url }}{{site.baseurl}}/images/Architecture-overview.svg" type="image/svg+xml"></object>

The GFW project is made up by many different components and datasets.
The diagram above outlines how data flows in our system, and links to
the github repository of each subsystem or dataset.